-*- mode: markup; mode: smart-quote; -*-

* AI tools in education

It is inevitable that students will be tempted to use generative AI tools to do
schoolwork. No doubt some students already are. So it is totally reasonable for
us to be disconcerted by certain possibilities, such as students using ChatGPT
to write essays with almost no effort on their part. But it is also important to
understand that regardless of how much future AI tools live up to the current
level of hype, today’s AI tools have real capabilities today that aren’t going
away and some of which already make them legitimately useful. They also have
serious limitations, some of which make them, at least presently, inappropriate
tools for many tasks.

In order to formulate thoughtful policies on the acceptable use of AI tools in
school we need to consider possible uses along two dimensions. The obvious
dimension, and one that as educators we should be well equipped to evaluate, is
whether a particular use will hurt or help students’ learning.

In some cases this is easy: we can probably all agree that a student pasting an
essay prompt into ChatGPT and turning in ChatGPT’s output without even reading
it has probably not learned much of anything. On the other hand, a student
struggling with a concept who asks ChatGPT for an explanation and then asks
follow-up questions about the parts they still didn’t understand may learn quite
a lot, at least assuming the topic is one for which ChatGPT produces accurate
explanations.

Which brings us to the other important dimension that we need to consider:
whether current AI tools are actually good for a given use. Asking an AI tool to
explain concepts is obviously only a good use of the tool if its explanations
are good. Unfortunately the limitations of current AI tools make it easy to be
misled about what they are actually good at.

For example, ChatGPT is often quite good at summarizing text that you paste into
the chat box. However if you ask it to summarize something from a well-known
book without actually providing the text it will probably make something up
that, while plausible sounding, is not based on the contents of the book at all.
From the point of view of how ChatGPT actually works, these are very different
problems but from the point of view of someone not immersed in how GPT works and
who has been told GPT was trained on “the whole internet” they might seem like
very similar problems. Its success on the first task may mislead us or our
students into thinking it will also be good at the second task.

This is just one example but if we want to guide our students towards uses of AI
tools that will serve desirable educational purposes, we need to build our own
understanding of the different possible uses of AI tools and where they sit on
the dimensions of both learning and utility.

Additionally, I believe AI tools present a new educational challenge, beyond how
we allow or disallow their use in school, which is we now have to teach our
students to make their own evaluations of what AI tools are good for. Our
students will live in a world where these tools exist and as citizens, workers,
and leaders of the future, they will need to be able to continue to assess
whether different uses of AI are appropriate or not as AI capabilities continue
to evolve.

** tl;dr?

Just for grins, I asked ChatGPT to summarize the above text:

  ## gpt

  The text discusses the use of artificial intelligence (AI) tools, like
  ChatGPT, in schools and the potential benefits and drawbacks these tools
  present. It highlights that while some students may misuse these tools to
  complete schoolwork with minimal effort, there are also ways in which these
  tools can assist in learning, such as providing explanations for difficult
  concepts.

  However, the effectiveness of AI tools depends on their capacity to perform a
  task well, which varies based on their current limitations. For example,
  ChatGPT may excel at summarizing given text, but it can't generate accurate
  summaries for content it hasn't been directly given, like books. This can lead
  to misunderstandings about the capabilities of AI tools.

  The text suggests that to formulate effective policies on the use of AI tools
  in schools, educators must consider two dimensions: the potential impact on
  students' learning and the actual effectiveness of the tool for a given task.
  Moreover, it suggests that as AI tools continue to evolve, students should be
  taught how to critically evaluate their uses, as they will become citizens,
  workers, and leaders in a world where these tools are prevalent.

  ##.
